# Distributed data system and shared architectures

---

## What is a DDS

Any distributed system that provide commonly needed functionalities for storing, accessing, and processing data by distributing data, load and , sometimes, control over the network.

it is important to distinguish between

- Comupute intensive applications
  - cpu is the bottleneck
- Data Intensive applications
  - persistent memory is the bottleneck

Problem arise when we scale up in complexity and  amount of data.

## Data intensive applications

- In the developement od data-intensive applications rely on distributed systems
- In 2016 there was an explosion in number of distrubuted application.
- there is a big intrest in both academic and industry in distributed solutions
  
## What we will do

- Now
  - Reference arch
  - share-nothing arch.

- Later in the course
  - frameworks for developing data intensive applications for analytical scenarios.

---

## Computing at scale

- Big data applications require a huge number og processing and data
  - measured in petabytes
  - needs special hardware, algorithms, tools to work at this scale

**Scaling** is an issue

---

## Vertical scaling Vs Horiziontal scaling

- **Vertical** scaling :
  - My hardware is not enough, by a "bigger" machine!
  - Technology is not enough (more powerful hw might not exist yet!)
- **Horizontal** scaling :
  - Share the load of data storing / processing between nodes
  - distributed data
  - distributred processing

---

## Computer clusters

Loosely or tightly connected machines which work together and in many aspects can be viewed as a single system.

- Most systems rely in shared-nothing architecture.
- Any node maght as well be basic and simple machine made of cheap components.
- Close connection.
- Each node is set to perform similar tasks.
- a cluster can be owned and used by a single organization or be available on the cloud

Most of the top tech companies offer cloud cluster computing as a service.

## Clusters stack

Computer clusters are multileveled

- **Racks**
  - many connected machines (very close 1Gb/s)

- **Clusters**
  - many connected racks (LAN 100mb/s and more)

- **Data center**
  - hundreds of racks (LAN)
  - rely on specialized hardware to cool and power clusters

- **Network of data centers**
  - Connected data centers (WAN highly variable bandwidth)

Google datacenters might hace millions of servers

---

Horizontal scaling rely on shared-nothing architectures.

---

## Architectural models

What is the best architecture for developing data-intensive applications?

Useful Measurements :

- bandwidth
- latency

---

## Comparing Architectures

Comparison with respsect to to performance for data access

- Centralized r/w from disk
- Distributed r/w from disk + data exange over the net
- look at the slides

### Setting: Analytical applications

- have to read all the dataset
- file written once and read many many times
- Assuming the seek time is necgligeble compared tot he transfer time
  
The advantages of data distribution (partitioning) and task parallization become clearer
